[IBC] Implement ICS-23 CommitmentProof verification for the SMT (#845)
pokt-network/pocket: ibc/docs/ics23.md

3. Compare the root hash with the one provided and expect them to be identical

Non-membership proofs are verified as follows:

1. If the `ActualValueHash` field in the `ExclusionProof` is the SMT's placeholder value (`[32]byte`, i.e. the key is not set in the tree), then use the placeholder value as the leaf node hash and skip to step 3 below
2. If the `ActualValueHash` field is not the placeholder value, then use the `ActualPath` and `ActualValueHash` fields (provided via `NonMembershipLeafData`) to generate the leaf node hash.
   - **IMPORTANT**: DO NOT hash these values before hashing the node as they are populated from the SMT proof's `NonMembershipLeafData` field and thus are already hashed
3. Hash the leaf node hash with the `SideNodes` found in the `Path` field of the `ExclusionProof` to generate the root hash
4. Compare the root hash with the one provided
   - if `computedRootHash == providedRootHash`
     - `key` not in tree -> `Proof` is valid -> exclusion QED
   - if `computedRootHash != providedRootHash`
     - `key` is in tree -> `Proof` is invalid -> exclusion QED

```mermaid

> flowchart TD

Reviewer: Appreciate the new diagram!

> # ICS-23 Vector Commitments <!-- omit in toc -->

Reviewer: @h5law Stupid question below.

> . Hash the leaf node hash with the `SideNodes` found in the `Path` field of the `ExclusionProof` to generate the root hash

This looks like a merkle proof, so do you know why we call it a vector commitment?

> # ICS-23 Vector Commitments <!-- omit in toc -->

Author: This is a merkle proof but they call them vector commitments in ICS-23 its the name of the spec heres how they define it:
> A vector commitment is a construction that produces a constant-size, binding commitment to an indexed vector of elements and short membership and/or non-membership proofs for any indices & elements in the vector.

AFAIK no one is actually using vector commitments they are all using merkle proofs for ICS-23

  - [Converting `SparseMerkleProof` to `CommitmentProof`](#converting-sparsemerkleproof-to-commitmentproof)
  - [Proof Verification](#proof-verification)

## Overview

[ICS-23][ics23] defines the types and functions needed to verify membership of a key-value pair in a `CommitmentState`. As the Pocket IBC implementation uses the [SMT][smt] for its provable stores this is what is referred to as the `CommitmentState` object. Cosmos has a library `cosmos/ics23` which is already SDK agnostic and defines many of the types necessary for ICS-23. This library was able to be used _mostly_ out of the box, with some minor adjustments detailed below.

## Implementation

The benefit of using `cosmos/ics23` over implementing similar types ourselves is twofold:

1. It is already SDK agnostic, so can be used by Pocket (a non-cosmos chain) without any issues.
2. The functions defined for proof verification are separate from the tree structures themselves
   - This means we do not need to interact with an SMT instance in order to verify proofs.

However, there were some changes made specifically for Pocket's implementation of ICS-23.

### Custom SMT `ProofSpec`

> The `ProofSpec` type in `cosmos/ics23` is used to define the steps needed to verify a proof, what hashing functions should be used, any node prefixes, etc. This is then passed into the verification functions in order to verify a proof, instead of having to interact with the tree itself. This is useful as proofs must be verified on a light-client and as such being able to verify a proof without creating a tree is much more memory efficient.

Author: No so remember the way that we construct a proof requires us to provide the hashes of the neighbouring nodes so that when we hash the key-value pair in conjunction with the hashes in the proof (as long as we get their left/right order correct) we can reconstruct the root hash. The tree itself does this method without going back "into" the tree. What the using the tree does is that it allows us to use the hashing functions the tree was set up with without providing them again.

So when we do this without the tree it means
1. We do not need to create a tree
2. We follow the exact same steps
3. We have to provide the hashing functions
4. In the "steps" we have to say the order of the hashes

If we look at how we define the order of the hashes its kinda simple:
```go
func convertSideNodesToSteps(sideNodes [][]byte, path []byte) []*ics23.InnerOp {
	steps := make([]*ics23.InnerOp, 0, len(sideNodes))
	for i := 0; i < len(sideNodes); i++ {
		var prefix, suffix []byte
		prefix = append(prefix, innerPrefix...)
		if getPathBit(path, len(sideNodes)-1-i) == left {
			suffix = make([]byte, 0, len(sideNodes[i]))
			suffix = append(suffix, sideNodes[i]...)
		} else {
			prefix = append(prefix, sideNodes[i]...)
		}
		op := &ics23.InnerOp{
			Hash:   ics23.HashOp_SHA256,
			Prefix: prefix,
			Suffix: suffix,
		}
		steps = append(steps, op)
	}
	return steps
```

Then when we hash using this step with either a prefix or a suffix we add the current hash into the missing space and we have an inner node! This is then hashed to produce the next current hash and so on until we have the root.

> The `ProofSpec` type in `cosmos/ics23` is used to define the steps needed to verify a proof, what hashing functions should be used, any node prefixes, etc. This is then passed into the verification functions in order to verify a proof, instead of having to interact with the tree itself. This is useful as proofs must be verified on a light-client and as such being able to verify a proof without creating a tree is much more memory efficient.

Reviewer: Got it. So the tl;dr of the point you're making is that merkle proofs are verifiable without the tree. Correct?

As the SMT used by Pocket Network only stores hashed values by default, the IBC stores use the `WithValueHasher(nil)` option which stores the raw bytes of the values in the tree. As such the following `ProofSpec` was created:

```go
smtSpec *ics23.ProofSpec = &ics23.ProofSpec{
	LeafSpec: &ics23.LeafOp{
		Hash:         ics23.HashOp_SHA256,
		PrehashKey:   ics23.HashOp_SHA256,
		PrehashValue: ics23.HashOp_NO_HASH,
		Length:       ics23.LengthOp_NO_PREFIX,
        Prefix:       []byte{0},
	},
	InnerSpec: &ics23.InnerSpec{
		ChildOrder:      []int32{0, 1},
		ChildSize:       32,
		MinPrefixLength: 1,
		MaxPrefixLength: 1,
        EmptyChild:      make([]byte, 32),
		Hash:            ics23.HashOp_SHA256,
	},
	MaxDepth:                   256,
	PrehashKeyBeforeComparison: true,
}
```

The main change from the `cosmos/ics23` `SmtSpec` object is that the `PrehashValue` field is set to not hash values prior to hashing the key-value pair.

### Converting `SparseMerkleProof` to `CommitmentProof`

> In order to convert the proofs generated by the SMT into a serialisable proof used by `cosmos/ics23`, the `SideNodes` field of the `SparseMerkleProof` must be converted into a list of `InnerOp` types which define the order of the hashes. The order of the hashes is important as depending on whether the next hash is the left or right neighbour of the current hash, they will be hashed in a different order, ultimately creating a different root hash. This conversion allows the verification to produce the same root hash as the SMT would have produced when verifying the proof.

Author: There were old discussions in celestia's repo on this. It is possible and we could do it. It would be a heft task though. A cool idea would be setting `k` on creation. But as stated in those previous discussions we would need to benchmark it appropriately.

I am thinking of creating a suite of benchmark tests in the SMT we could then use as a baseline for any changes moving forward

> In order to convert the proofs generated by the SMT into a serialisable proof used by `cosmos/ics23`, the `SideNodes` field of the `SparseMerkleProof` must be converted into a list of `InnerOp` types which define the order of the hashes. The order of the hashes is important as depending on whether the next hash is the left or right neighbour of the current hash, they will be hashed in a different order, ultimately creating a different root hash. This conversion allows the verification to produce the same root hash as the SMT would have produced when verifying the proof.

Author: Yeah I'd like to explore this, as I mentioned it was a topic of discussion in the original SMT repo and would be cool to find our own optimisation - potentially for different node stores we could provide a optimal `k` constant:
```go
const (
  SimpleMapStoreK = 2
  BadgerK = 4
)
```
This could be cool.

As `SparseMerkleProof` objects represent both inclusion and exclusion proofs as defined in the [JMT whitepaper][jmt] the conversion step will convert the SMT proof into either a `ExistenceProof` or `ExclusionProof` as defined in `cosmos/ics23`.

### Proof Verification

When verifying membership of an element the logic is as follows:

1. Use the key-value pair to generate a leaf hash
2. Hash the leaf with the `SideNodes` found in the `path` field of the `ExistenceProof` to generate the root hash
3. Compare the root hash with the one provided

For non-membership the logic is as follows:

1. If the `ActualValueHash` field in the `ExclusionProof` is the SMT's placeholder value, then use the placeholder value as the leaf node hash and follow steps 3-4
2. If the `ActualValueHash` field is not the placeholder value, then use the `ActualPath` and `ActualValueHash` fields to generate the leaf node hash - do not hash these values before hashing the node as they are populated from the SMT proof's `NonMembershipLeafData` field and thus are already hashed
3. Hash the leaf node hash with the `SideNodes` found in the `Path` field of the `ExclusionProof` to generate the root hash

> 4. Compare the root hash with the one provided

Reviewer: because we're using `ActualValueHash`, we also verify that the root hash is the same as the one computed even though it's different from the value the user gives?

Can you clarify this point

### Converting `SparseMerkleProof` to `CommitmentProof`

In order to convert the proofs generated by the SMT into a serialisable proof used by `cosmos/ics23`, the `SideNodes` field of the `SparseMerkleProof` must be converted into a list of `InnerOp` types which define the order of the hashes. The order of the hashes is important as depending on whether the next hash is the left or right neighbour of the current hash, they will be hashed in a different order, ultimately creating a different root hash. This conversion allows the verification to produce the same root hash as the SMT would have produced when verifying the proof.

As `SparseMerkleProof` objects represent both inclusion and exclusion proofs as defined in the [JMT whitepaper][jmt]. The conversion step will convert the SMT proof into either an `ExistenceProof` or `ExclusionProof` as defined in `cosmos/ics23`.

### Proof Verification

Membership proofs are verified as follows:

1. Use the key-value pair to generate a leaf hash
2. Hash the leaf with the `SideNodes` found in the `path` field of the `ExistenceProof` to generate the root hash
3. Compare the root hash with the one provided and expect them to be identical

> Non-membership proofs are verified as follows:

Reviewer: @h5law I don't know why I'm struggling to understand this documentation, but I put together this mermaid diagram. Can you edit it based on your understanding?

I still feel like I have a gap in my knowledge somewhere.

```mermaid

---
title: Exclusion Proof 
---
flowchart TD
    I["Proof,Key"]
    NMD{"proof.NonMembershipLeafData == nil ?"}
    KP1["actualPath = sha256(key) \n actualValue = placeholderNode"]
    KP2["actualPath = ProvidedKeyHash \n actualValue = ProvidedValueHash"]
    Compare{"ComputedRootHash == ProvidedRootHash ?"}
    R1{"actualValue == placeholderNode ?\n\n Tree matches - exclusion \n requires empty node for path(key)"}
    R2{"actualValue == providedValueHash ?\n\n Tree does not match - exclusion \n requires provided value at the path given"}    
    EV["Exclusion Prove VALID"]
    EI["Exclusion Prove INVALID"]

    I --> NMD
    NMD -- Yes --> KP1
    NMD -- No --> KP2

    KP1 -- Key,Value --> Compare
    KP2 -- Key,Value --> Compare
    
    Compare -- Yes --> R1
    Compare -- No --> R2

    R1 -- Yes --> EV
    R1 -- No --> EI
    R2 -- Yes --> EV
    R2 -- No --> EI    
```

Author: Have updated the docs with an accurate diagram

> 1. If the `ActualValueHash` field in the `ExclusionProof` is the SMT's placeholder value, then use the placeholder value as the leaf node hash and skip to step 3 below

Author: Not made this change but instead clarified the statement

2. If the `ActualValueHash` field is not the placeholder value, then use the `ActualPath` and `ActualValueHash` fields to generate the leaf node hash.
   - **IMPORTANT**: DO NOT hash these values before hashing the node as they are populated from the SMT proof's `NonMembershipLeafData` field and thus are already hashed
3. Hash the leaf node hash with the `SideNodes` found in the `Path` field of the `ExclusionProof` to generate the root hash
4. Compare the root hash with the one provided

>    - As the non-membership proof uses the `ActualValueHash` field to generate the leaf node hash, the non-membership proof is actually proving membership of either a placeholder key or an unrelated key in the tree.

Author: Yeah my bad good spot!

>    - This means that if the root hash computed and the one provided are equal then the key we were looking for was not in the tree. If they are not equal the proof is invalid and the key is in the tree.

Reviewer: SOrry for the back & forth, but I'm personally still struggling to understand this. I tried to reword it so it's easier for the reader:

Is this correct?
```suggestion
   - if `computedRooHash == providedRootHash`: `key` not in tree -> `Proof` is valid -> exclusion QED
   - if `computedRooHash != providedRootHash`: `key is in tree` -> `Proof` is invalid  -> exclusion QED
```
